You are uncomfortable talking about your
family's wealth.
That a statement. It's [laughter] a
statement and a question.
>> guess so.
>> [music]
>> I'm Lulu Garcia Navarro and today I'm in
Springfield, Illinois to speak with
Illinois Governor J.B. Pritzker.
Pritzker has been governor here since
2018 [music] and he's running for a rare
third term. He's also become one of
President Trump's chief antagonists.
>> If you come for my people, you come for
me. So, come and get me. And partially
because of that, many people see him as
a strong [music] contender for the
Democratic presidential nomination in
2028. [music] He's not saying anything
about his plans quite yet, though. A
former businessman from one of America's
most wealthy and influential families,
being a progressive billionaire has
become central to Pritzker's brand.
>> [music]
>> But as anti-billionaire sentiment grows
on the left, that's also a potential
source of tension. [music]
So, we get into that and also where he
sees his party going. Here's my
conversation with Illinois Governor J.B.
Pritzker.
>> [music]
>> Governor Pritzker, thank you so much for
joining us. I'm really excited to have
you on the interview. Great to be with
you, Lulu.
Uh it's a bit of a gray day here in
Springfield, Illinois, but we are at the
governor's mansion, which is um
really impressive, very beautiful, lots
of Abraham Lincoln. In fact, there's a
bust over there of Abraham Lincoln. Um
does it feel weird to have him sort of
looming over you sometimes?
No, it's really wonderful, actually. I
mean, to think about, you know, this is
the state that produced the greatest
president that we've ever had.
Um and a state that's produced other
great presidents too, like Barack Obama
and Ulysses S. Grant. Um and Ronald
Reagan. Uh so, you know, we're proud of
>> that he was born here.
>> Yeah. He always seems such a product of
California. Yeah, yeah. Um
you know, there's a lot going on in the
world, um lot going on in your state,
but I want to start um
with more of a philosophical question.
When we look at
this moment and this era, which is so
dominated obviously by the president, um
I've been really thinking about how he
wields executive power.
And I'm wondering what you think the
lesson for Democrats is um from
President Trump and how he has wielded
power to get what he wants.
I think it's a lesson for everyone that
gets elected to office in a in an
executive post. I think that
what President Trump has done is uh I
think I
operate like the president of a banana
republic. Uh or as if he were an
authoritarian. That is,
now he's got power, he's going to
vanquish his enemies
uh and rule in favor of the people who
will enrich him.
Uh and I think that the lesson is for
the country that that this is a
dangerous road that we've gone down
putting someone like that in public
office. We need to stand up against
corruption. We need to stand up uh and
make sure that whoever it is that gets
elected is someone who's good and decent
and kind. I think kindness is something
that's been missing in our politics. So,
you could say that's a lesson for
Democrats. I think it's a lesson for all
elected officials.
You know, you're sort of talking about
overreach um and ruling like an
authoritarian, which is one version of
looking at that. Um another version,
though, I think is how he's really been
able to push through an aggressive
agenda. Um you know, the shock and awe
theory of governance, if you will. Um
you know, I've heard so many voters
complain, and I'm sure you've heard this
too, about incrementalism, about, you
know, all the promises that get made
when you're running for office and then
feeling like
>> about it, too.
>> everything gets stymied once someone
gets into office. And I'm wondering if
there are lessons to be taken from the
frustration of voters and the way that
he's managed to do it. Yeah. I Let me
begin by saying that
uh I ran on an agenda as governor. I ran
on a very bold agenda and and I swiftly
enacted that agenda. And my first year
in office really accomplished most of
what I ran on, which were big things. Uh
I think that is the way uh to operate.
There's no doubt. Uh and that we as
Democrats, if there's a lesson, it's
that
there should be a Project 2029 for
Democrats. Now,
remember, though, that Project 2025 also
included uh taking away people's rights
and freedoms. It included uh tearing
down the safety net that the holds up
our working families and that stands up
for the most vulnerable in our society.
So, there are things about the agenda
that I think are
>> you don't agree with.
>> Not just that, I think they're
reprehensible and they're
anti-democratic. But But But yes, the
speed of the agenda and it's it's not
shock and awe as so much as run on the
agenda.
When you won it run and win on an
agenda, you can accomplish that agenda
and need to do it as soon as possible.
The problem is Donald Trump would say
things and now he's doing things that
are very different. Remember, he said,
"We're not going to cut Medicaid."
That's precisely what he's done.
What does a Project 2029 agenda look
like
for you? I don't think you can speak of
it in in shorthand, but I'll just say a
couple of things that I think are
absolutely necessary. Uh one is we've
got to restore the rule of law, and that
means holding people accountable who've
broken the law. I'm talking about in
this administration, when we get a new
one, the people in this administration
who've broken the law. And federal
agents who broken the law need to be
held accountable. And that means
criminally prosecuted. Criminally
prosecuted, civilly prosecuted, you
know, whatever it is that we can do,
right? It may be that you can't
criminally prosecute somebody, but that
you can go after them civilly. So,
that's one thing. But But a second
thing, just thinking about people's
everyday lives, right? I mean, just
lifting people up and making things more
affordable in the world. Um how about
finally, finally we Democrats get to
universal health care. Obamacare was
terrific and it advanced the cause,
but we still have a whole lot of people
that don't have coverage and now, of
course, it's being taken away from a lot
of people. So, that's part of the
agenda, universal health care. Uh
another part of the agenda is we've got
to raise the minimum wage in this
country. You know, the minimum wage is
$7.25. It's about $14, $14,000
a year
if you have one full-time job. You can't
survive on 14 As a single person, you
can't
>> There's no place in the country.
>> And And even if you hold two minimum
wage jobs, $28,000 a year. Um you can't
raise a family on that. Maybe you could
survive alone on that. So, why are we
allowing people to live at $7.25? By the
way, the tipped wage in this country is
about $2.20
an hour.
Ridiculous. We need to raise wages in
this country and start with the minimum
wage. So, I give that as an example
because health care and people earning
enough to live on, those seem like basic
fundamentals of who we are as Democrats.
That ought to be right at the top of the
agenda. Hm.
Why do you think there hasn't been a
Project 2029 by the Democrats and their
think tank allies, which is actually how
Project 2025 came about from from the
right? They They was a concerted effort
from many different groups to sort of
enact it.
It's a great question and you talked
about incrementalism earlier. Uh I do
think that that people feel like, you
know, well, we need the public to come
along on every issue and so, let's play
them out over several years so that we
can finally get consensus and so on.
It's true, but some of these issues have
been around for an awful long time. And
I guarantee you that if you pulled the
American public about raising the
minimum wage, 80% including a majority
of Republicans would say it's time to
raise the minimum wage. So, there I I
don't think we need to be incrementalist
about some things that I think are
universally understood. So, as we're
speaking,
um
we have just had our first insight into
the
feeling of the voting public because
we've had a sort of our first primaries
in for the midterms. And in particular,
of course, this the Texas Senate primary
um is being looked at very closely on
both the left and the right. Um James
Talleyrand defeated Jasmine Crockett.
And that race was seen as something of a
bellwether uh for the kind of approach
that works best for Democrats. And I'm
just wondering what your takeaways from
that were.
You know, if you look across the last
five or so elections, if you include
Spanberger's election in Virginia and
Mikey Sherrill's election in New Jersey
and Mondaire election in New York City.
And as you said, the uh primary in uh in
Texas, as well as the the election or
nomination of Roy Cooper in North
Carolina. And that is they've run on an
affordability agenda. They've run on
making sure that working people
understand we Democrats are the ones who
are fighting for them, not the other
guys. Now, I know that what you're
asking me is, oh, the split in the Is
there a split in the Democratic Party
and one side or another, you know, has
>> There always is. But the truth is that
both of these candidates, what they
exhibited, I'm talking about Texas now,
what they exhibited was the ability to
incite and excite particularly young
people who often are left out of
politics because historically haven't
voted in large numbers, but these are
the folks who are taking over the
country over time and then sometimes
young people are the ones who come up
with the best ideas and are the ones who
want us to have a bold agenda. And so
you didn't hear either one of those
candidates speaking in incrementalist
kind of
terminology, right? They were they were
out there talking about transformative
change. But there's a there's another
thing that people are inferring from
that which is um
there were two different candidates with
very different styles.
And Jasmine Crockett obviously was
you know has positioned herself as a
fighter against Trump in particular
and James Talarico has taken a
completely sort of different tact. And I
am
you know sort of wondering about that
because you have adopted a very um
combative position when in regards to
President Trump, in regards to defending
your state and you know when you when
you look at the lesson that some are
drawing from Talarico
some would say maybe there's a there's
another way to do this where you can
stand for what you believe in but you
don't have to adopt the same
sort of
public um
combativeness that the President Trump
adopts.
Uh I can tell you this that when you've
got somebody who's taking people's
rights away in the president today is
taking people's rights away when he's
attacking people's freedoms, when he's
not following the law, when he's corrupt
and enriching himself. I mean moms are
being shot in the face.
I I don't know how on earth you can
stand
up about Donald Trump and say well let's
work with him.
He's not you can't work with him. He's
got an entire history Lulu of not living
up to his promises. He can't be trusted.
I'm talking about when he was in
business, you shake hands with him on
something or sign a contract, he'd break
it and sue you even though he was in the
wrong.
In politics
every time you know someone he'd make
friends with and then he all of a sudden
you know he's turned on you. That
happens I mean it's happened repeatedly.
I mean his first term, his second term,
he's not a loyal person. He expects
loyalty to him but he's not loyal back.
>> Well you say that you can't work with
Donald Trump but I look at Mayor Mamdani
of New York whom you know you mentioned
and has been one of the you know bright
lights for Democrats at the moment. And
you know he's tried to woo him. He's
tried to work with him where he can. Um
because of what as we've seen the
federal government you know wield
enormous power.
And it's hard to do things without it.
So what do you think about that way of
doing things?
Remember I've been in office now for
seven years. I was in office when Donald
Trump was president the first time.
When the pandemic hit Mhm. I called the
president and asked for help. Told him
we needed ventilators, we needed masks
and that he should invoke the Defense
Production Act but that we absolutely
immediately needed to save people's
lives and needed the federal government.
He promised to do that and didn't
deliver.
Now this is in the most dire of
circumstances. You would think that the
federal government under Donald Trump
under anybody would understand that
people are dying and the federal
government can help they need to help.
Look what he's done to FEMA, the Federal
Emergency Management Agency which
normally steps in when there are
disasters. He's ripped it apart. You
can't get help from the federal
government anymore. We've seen that.
He's denied that when we've had floods
and other problems here in Illinois.
>> You seem to be implying that Mayor
Mamdani
is a neophyte and doesn't doesn't have
the experience he's doing this.
>> anything away from him. I understand why
you try. I'm just saying I have my own
experiences. And by the way if you look
at his entire history, Donald Trump's
entire history
it's breaking promises with people.
And so
I'm just saying maybe our different
circumstances are leading us to
different conclusions. One last question
on sort of the theory of of power for
for Democrats. Obviously President Trump
is a master an enormous amount of
executive power during um
uh
this administration.
Um
do you think Democrats should they
retake the presidency
that they should keep that executive
power in order to
um
enact the changes that they want? I mean
should the executive remain as powerful
as it is? It's a great question and I
will say that that the Constitution
confers a lot of power on the executive
already.
Then what happened is the first and
frankly the the worst thing that has
happened is the Supreme Court
essentially said the president is immune
entirely immune from anything. Literally
what they've said is if the president
decides to shoot somebody, he said this
himself when he was running. Now the
Supreme Court said yeah that's fine. He
can shoot somebody and he's immune. Um
well
>> but almost. Okay but that's the point is
that I mean it is extreme what the
Supreme Court has conferred the power
that they've conferred on him. Um and
he's grabbed the power.
>> he's executing the the you know his
office not because he wants to go and
shoot someone. I understand that. I'm
not accusing him of actually committing
murder. Right. But I do think that
Democrats should look for ways to make
sure that the shape and size of the
executive in the United States is
as the founders intended it and not as
this Supreme Court has now made it.
>> I've never known a politician to limit
their own power.
I hear [snorts] what you're saying but I
think that that is why character
matters. I think that's going to really
matter in 2028. Who is the person or who
are the people that are being elevated
to the nominees of their party and are
they people who will actually stand up
for the tradition of democracy and a
republic if we can keep it. Look
everybody wants you know let's have
something happen right now today. It's
unfortunate democracy doesn't generally
operate that way. Authoritarians can.
But democracy is a little bit slower
than that. I do believe that we can
operate in a much more efficient fashion
and effectuate the policies that we care
about in a democratic fashion but not by
taking away people's rights, not by
ignoring the Constitution or the law.
That's what Donald Trump thinks. He
thinks if you ignore the Constitution
and the law well gee we can move a lot
faster.
We'd all like to move faster to get
things done. I don't agree with his
aims.
But I also very much believe that if you
want this country's form of government
to survive that we need to restore some
semblance of the democracy that we knew
before Donald Trump came in office.
I'd like to um
talk about how you became you.
You
suffered a lot of tragedy very young.
Um
your father Donald died at the age of 39
of a heart attack when you were on seven
years old. It stuck in my mind my father
died also very young at the age of 39
when I was five.
Um
what impact
did that have on you personally? I mean
do you remember that age and and
you know what what happened then?
I do.
Um
I mean I was seven. That's obviously
young and you know you have limited
memories but
of course I remember. I remember losing
my father. I remember what it felt like.
My mother and father were actually
out of town. They were very far away
from us, right? Hawaii. And so my mother
called her friends and
said I need you to go to our house and
make sure that our kids aren't watching
TV.
I don't want them to find out anywhere
else except from me. So I need time to
get back.
Um and of [clears throat] course she had
to bring my father's body back. And so
her friends who were so important in our
lives um
you know came and like
arranged to take us out for the day and
we went to a place called Fisherman's
Wharf in San Francisco and
you know we did some it seemed like just
a fun day away. Um you know we knew our
parents were out of town.
>> Hi. Um and here were these nice people
taking us to a fun place.
So it it allowed my mother to get back
and I remember her coming back into our
house and taking us into her their
bedroom and sitting us down
and telling us what happened.
Um
>> [clears throat]
>> you know and I think back on it now as a
as an adult with children and I think
how hard that must have been for her.
Like I know how hard it was for me to
hear it. Um
but I can think back now and say
how hard must that have been to tell
your children
that they've lost their father. People
do it every day unfortunately. Um but I
admire I think about a lot of things
about my mother and I admire her so much
but I think that moment how hard was
that for her? She just lost the love of
her life.
Um and and a whole lot of other things.
She was the part her his partner really
in building the business. Um you know
her life is very much built around their
them as a couple. Right? And all of a
sudden she's alone with three young
children.
Um so I I remember all of that and and I
subsequently talked to their friends. As
an adult I went back and found you know
many of their friends
who were you know in their 70s or 80s
when I did talk to them about it and
they remembered distinctly because my
father was the youngest friend of theirs
that had ever died. Like their first
friend that had died and they remember
how profound it was for them because he
was also like the life of the party, you
know, he was the person when they would
all get together that would kind of the
whole room kind of leaned toward my
father when he would enter a room cuz he
was a big gregarious personality and a
nice person
and held the attention of people
and so it's something I think a lot of
people
um were profoundly impacted by. Remember
though in [clears throat] addition to
that after that my mother who was an
alcoholic, you know, she you know, all
the challenges you can imagine for
someone who's now become a widow with
three young children and then add on to
that a disease
that is so hard to overcome. Most people
don't.
Many people don't. And you had to take
care of her and and as with your
siblings, I mean it became, you know,
she was sort of crippled by by the loss.
When she was drinking and she was also,
you know, she found, you know, she went
to Alcoholics Anonymous. She she checked
herself in
over time, you know, to to to a place
that could help her
and so she tried really hard and she was
sober. It wasn't like she was drunk all
the time, but she she was sober a lot
and
and she was one of the smartest people
that I've ever met.
I don't think that's just the view of a
7-year-old or a 10-year-old or, you
know, 15-year-old and she was special
and yet she was just I mean she had to
overcome this disease and I remember one
day she sat us down. This is I don't
know when I was 8 or 9. She sat us down
she said, "I want you to know that
sometimes it probably feels to you like
I don't love you because I'm not being a
mother to you that I want to be, but I
want you to understand this is a
disease. I have a disease and I'm trying
very hard to overcome it and
and I'm going to overcome it." She would
say and she she actually gave us a book
in that one
moment that I can remember, you know,
she gave us a book to read about
alcoholism, about the struggle that
people have to overcome this disease and
that it is a disease.
Um
but unfortunately she was never able to
overcome it and it overcame her and took
her life. Yeah, and you became an orphan
at 17, I think. Yeah.
I mean that's an extraordinary
you know, series of losses. How would
you say that shaped you?
I you know, I
you know, I I don't want to aggrandize
it or minimize it and just say that a
whole lot of people go through
tragedy
and experience it differently and come
out of it differently. Losing both
parents is a particularly
difficult one as a for a child.
Yes and
um a lot of the outcome has to do with
how old were you when those things
happened, were there people around you
other than them who cared about you and
took care of you and, you know, made
sure that you weren't going to fall off
the edge of the earth.
>> And who were those people for you? Well,
my brother and sister and I were very
close and I was lucky I had two older
siblings so that was helpful for me. I
think they would say also as I would
that there were my parents' friends who
cared deeply about us and we had a
broader family who really, you know, put
their arms all the way around us
and made sure that we were going to be
okay. And so I I just feel lucky because
a whole lot of people as you know
don't have resources, don't have a
family that would step in and care for
them and don't have a large group of
friends who can do what [clears throat]
their friends did. And so for me anyway,
I mean there are a lot of lessons I
think um
I think you learn compassion
going through that for other people
because you've been through it yourself.
Um
and I think it's important to those are
lessons that I carry with me all the
time. You know, my mother was really she
was
more than just a story about someone who
tragically died of alcoholism, right?
She was she was an activist. She was an
LGBTQ and and abortion rights activist
>> her with making [clears throat] you a
Democrat.
>> Really, truly. And my father was too. He
was a Democrat. But my you know, my
mother, yeah, she I don't know if she
maybe we were Democrats for sure. You
grow up in a home where you you know,
your mother is an activist
for civil rights and human rights
and where we were licking envelopes and
stamps and stuffing envelopes, you know,
for candidates. That's how you got your
message out back then before the
internet. I went to marches with my
mother and
so yeah, she was a special person. She
left a a legacy in my view for all three
of us. My sister, you know,
has done public service. My brother's he
hasn't served in public office, but he
has done public service.
I think all of us feel like we have a
whole legacy of public service before my
mother. I might add my father was in the
Navy.
I mean I think all of us feel a kind of
a dedication to serving the public. So
the experiences that I had when I was
young that shaped me I think about
thinking about the challenges that other
people go through were also intermixed
with the idea that maybe I could do
something about it. Um your great
grandfather,
the patriarch of the Pritzker clan,
came to the United States in the late
1800s fleeing the Jewish pogroms in
Ukraine
and [snorts] he became incredibly
successful and of course your family
became one of the wealthiest
in America running a hotel business. I
mean it is one of the best known hotel
hotel um
companies in in the United States.
>> interrupt you just for a moment just to
say
um it was a motel business. I mean
people like think these things just come
from that, you know, small business
people like people who start something.
My my father and his brother built
something that nobody thought would be
successful and it was. It was an atrium
lobby hotel, the first one in the United
States and it was a hugely successful
hotel. It was the start of something
big. I only mention that because
I think we overlook kind of how hard it
is to build something like that from
from scratch. Yeah, no. I mean
extraordinary and he helped build, you
know, the Hyatt Hotel Group.
You are uncomfortable talking about your
family's wealth.
That's a statement.
>> [laughter]
>> It's a statement and a question.
>> I guess so.
Um I'm not I'm proud. I really am proud.
I'm also feeling incredibly lucky. I'm
not uncomfortable. I'm just
uncomfortable with the assumptions that
people make about you and so I you know,
I just I know how lucky I was and am.
So I think that that obviously was part
of what shaped me. I also think though
that the values that my parents taught
me about, you know,
about social justice and and compassion.
I think those are all things that
whether you're wealthy or you're poor or
you're middle class, like those values
that you grow up with are who you are
and
and it doesn't matter how much money you
have. If you have resources, you can
maybe do more to carry out those values,
you know, to for other people perhaps.
But that's how I think about it and I
know that when I ran for governor for
example in 2017
that you know, Donald Trump was
president of the United States and here
comes a wealthy guy running as a
Democrat for governor. So I get it. I
understand people had that in their
heads. But again, I had to
go everywhere in the state and talk to
everybody so people could understand
that, you know, that
it's where your heart is, it's where
your values are that matters, not how
much you have or how little you have.
Fair.
How much are you worth?
You know, you can read magazines that
will estimate
what I'm worth. So
you know, we I've obviously have had
investments. It's all in a blind trust
now. I couldn't tell you what it's
worth. I ask because I'm wondering how
much financial transparency do you think
politicians owe voters?
Well, I fill out a statement of economic
interest every year and publish it
and so
you know, I think there ought to be
transparency. I think one of the things
that's not transparent that I see every
day in this administration is Donald
Trump is literally enriching himself and
his children and his family. I think he
is using Vladimir Putin as a model
and you know, Vladimir Putin is
purported to be one of the if not the
wealthiest person in the world and he's
done that in a corrupt fashion running
you know, Russia and I believe that's
what Donald Trump is hoping to do as
president of the United States. You can
see it every day. The reason I I want to
stay with this and and
you know, Donald Trump is obviously one
example
but
there is a real discomfort at the moment
with wealth in politics. I understand.
And
and I'm just wondering how you view that
because you've used a lot of your own
money to finance your own campaigns to
the tune of hundreds of millions of
dollars. Um
A lot of people might say that's just
not fair.
I understand, but I will also tell you
that what people know about me is that
there's no special interest that could
buy me or tell me what to do. That even
the lobbyists are a bit confused.
You know, they they come to Springfield,
Illinois and they know who they can go
see cuz they can demand entry to
people's offices because their allies or
they themselves have given money
but they, you know, approach my office
understanding that if I want to talk to
them it's because I'm interested in
their issue. I either I agree with them
or I disagree with them, but we're going
to have a debate
or we're going to work together on
something not because they gave money to
me, but because I actually believe in
the cause.
What do you make of the moniker
of sort of the billionaire class
that has become very popular especially
on the left? I mean,
do you think all billionaires should be
lumped together?
I think that it's funny to me. Again,
you you asked the question up front
about, you know, I seem to be sensitive
about wealth
and it's in part because of like a
question like the one you just asked.
I know that there are people who just
want to lump everybody who is wealthy
together and say that they are evil or
they're fighting against them. And all I
can say is
that's not true of me and it's not true
of a number of people that I know.
And
if you're looking for percentages, I
don't know. Yeah, do you think the the
Democratic Party though then needs to
have a more nuanced view on this because
it seems like
you know, that narrative has really
taken over lately.
I think that the nuance here is about
again separating the question of how
much you have from who you really are.
And again, I know that when I got
elected, I needed to prove to people
that I was actually on their side. You
know, that I you have one thing to run
and have an agenda. It's another thing
to effectuate that agenda. Raising the
minimum wage to $15 from $8.25 in my
state, making sure that we actually were
enacting policies that were helping
working people and not about
aggrandizing or building up the wealth
of the wealthiest people in our state.
Those are things that, you know, you've
got to I've got a real record. Well, let
me ask you a policy question because
obviously in California there's a big
debate now over a proposed billionaire
tax
that's been very divisive needless to
say. There's a push in your state to
have a similar move.
You've said it's not a priority.
What do you say to people
who might think that
a billionaire tax is a good thing. I
mean, do you think that that is
something that is
I mean, it seems like a good sort of
idea in principle, but obviously there's
a lot of nuance to it. There is a lot of
nuance, but let let me start with just
to correct something you said. When you
said it's not a priority, that's not
accurate. As you know, I ran on it
when I ran. Then I actually got the
legislature to go along. I'm talking
about a graduated income tax, right?
Which taxes wealthy people at a higher
rate than it taxes everyday working
people.
>> proposing is a flat tax on billionaires.
Right, but but again, it would be a
higher tax on income than people
[clears throat] who are working
everyday.
So I want to just correct you to to make
sure that that listeners and you
understand that
I have been fighting for a more fair tax
system for a long time.
Then now you want to talk about the
nuance and I agree there's nuance in all
of it.
But I am in favor I I prioritize. I
believe that we ought to tax, you know,
and even you know, Warren Buffett will
say that too, you know, that we ought to
tax him more than we tax somebody who's
a secretary in his business. And he's
right. And we have a graduated income
tax by the way at the federal level.
Here in Illinois, we have a flat income
tax. That doesn't seem fair to me. Oh,
by the way, do you know who instituted
the first graduated income tax for the
United States? Abraham Lincoln.
Just to remind you where you are.
So uh
but there are nuances in this way. You
know, people also are thinking, well,
let's try to add up what somebody's
worth and we'll just take X% of their
assets. That's part of what some people
think is a wealth tax. And that is in
fact what I think they're trying to do
in California. The problem with that,
it's a practical question. The problem
with that is there are a whole lot of
assets that are held privately that are
not valued. You know, the way you value
something is what is the fair market
value and you can determine that easily
on the stock market. That's easy.
Because you can see everyday what what a
share is worth and add up how many
shares somebody has and say that's their
wealth. But you can't do that if you own
a home. I don't know what your home is
worth today. And forget about a home. If
you own some train tracks. Do people own
train tracks and rent them out? You
know, rent that to the
rail railroader companies.
It's just a practical question. And I do
think the fair way to do this is to say
wealthy people should pay a higher tax
on their incomes. We could debate by the
way capital gains income versus ordinary
income. That that's another question.
Should should capital gains be taxed at
a different rate than ordinary income?
And again, nuance is very important.
Here's the most important
principle. We need to pay for the
government that we need.
Okay? So how we do that is what you're
asking, what other people are asking.
How are you going to pay for the
government that we need? And also make a
system where there isn't such income
inequality, where the money that certain
groups have and the influence that they
wield
on all different parts of our life. I
mean, aren't as
>> Totally agree with you.
>> don't have such an impact. That is what
I hear from a lot of voters. And that's
why the method is important, right? That
that is that that someone who is making
$5 a year should pay a higher percentage
of their income than someone who is
making $50,000 a year. Here in Illinois,
I've cut taxes for people who are making
50, 60, 70, 80, 90,000 dollars a year
with an earned income tax credit
increase, with a child tax credit. I
increased the child tax credit after I
implemented the first one that that's
ever existed in Illinois because we do
want to make it easier for working
families to to make sure that that we're
paying for the things that we need and
we're supporting people in a way that
they never ever fall through what should
be a strong floor or safety net that no
one should ever fall through. I do think
that that's fair. And so that is what I
mean when I am saying wealthy people
should pay a fairer share, a more fair
share than they're paying now. You know,
you've you've hit something that is for
me like fascinating, which is the
fundamental divide about how you pay for
the things that you need. As you know,
the biggest knock Republicans
make
on Democratic run states is that they
are expensive and that they're
economically stagnant. And obviously
Illinois is not immune to those national
challenges that you're seeing in terms
of affordability, etc. You know, cost of
living here is challenging. Uh
a lot of young families have left the
state recently to places that aren't as
expensive. And I'm just
wondering when you think about working
families and the challenges that a state
like Illinois faces,
what is your sort of
answer to that criticism that basically
Democratic run states aren't where the
we're seeing the growth in this country
at the moment? You've asked a easy
question with a lot of complex
answers that you deserve.
Excuse [clears throat] me.
You deserve
an appropriate answer that question.
>> Please. Let me start with this.
I inherited when I became governor a
state that had been run by a Republican
governor who had devastated our fiscal
situation, had stagnated the state and
left us in a terrible position. I had to
rebuild after he left office. We had
suffered eight credit downgrades.
We had suffered no budget for two years.
He left
bills. So talk about irresponsibility.
Republicans
can be very irresponsible, too.
>> [snorts]
>> And the Republican running our state
was. I had to turn all of that around
and we've made a whole lot of progress.
So I don't doubt what you're suggesting
that we have a long road to travel in
Illinois, but it's about making progress
and working toward fighting for the
people who really need government. Now,
Democrats in Democratic states like me
anyway understand you got to grow the
economy
and you want to make sure people have
health care and the basic needs like
really good education. We've invested in
those things. Look at the states around
us. They have not. And the result is you
can't get the quality health care in
some of the Republican states that
surround me that you can in the state of
Illinois.
>> But this is exactly the point and I'm
not saying it's an easy one. This isn't
a gotcha. I'm actually just very
animated by this because, you know, the
problem here is you have a great school
system. You have health care. But
you need higher taxes to pay for that.
And it seems like one of those
fundamental issues because if people
feel squeezed by the cost of living and
by taxes,
they're going to move to places that
they can afford. Um and then it doesn't
help you with the education and the
health care. So it just seems like a
hard problem to solve.
>> The people that have moved to a place
like Florida are moving back. I mean,
here's the problem that
that first of all, 4.95% is our income
tax rate here. Um so
>> property taxes, I think you're like
number one in the country.
>> remember what caused that was not
investing in our public schools. That is
what caused it. Property taxes are
charged at the local level
and when you don't invest in public
schools from the state level, which is
what happened in Illinois when I took
over, Illinois was the worst state in
the country for funding education from a
state level. The result is if you want a
good school locally, you got to raise
local property taxes.
>> But how do you keep a young family from
not moving to Indiana, for example, even
though the public schools here are
better, even though because you're
seeing that happen?
>> growth and making sure that they have a
park that they can go to locally. States
are funding that. Our state is funding
that. Making sure they have good health
care available to me. You can't get
those things in Indiana. You can't get
those things in Republican run states.
You just can't. We actually believe in
sort of quality of life is something
very important for us to be investing in
and so that's what we're doing and we're
doing it in a very difficult fiscal
situation now made harder by the
Republicans
who are imposing on Republican states
and Democratic states very difficult
circumstances where you can't get food
assistance when you need it and you
can't get health care when you need it
and they're raising the cost of health
care for working poor people. These are
working people that they're raising the
costs on. There there are reasons why
people move to Illinois. There are
reasons why the trend moves in our
direction and indeed our population is
increasing in Illinois now. One of
I think the more interesting proposals
that you've had is so-called social
media tax. I'm very interested in this.
Can you explain how that would work and
what it is? Yes, it's a fee
and the fee is on a per user basis for
the largest social media companies and
the idea
>> a tax paid by the social media companies
themselves.
>> a it's a fee paid by them. Look, here's
what's happening. Social media companies
are benefiting from the 13 million
people that live in the state of
Illinois, but they're giving nothing
back to us. They don't benefit the state
in any way, the people of Illinois in
any way and their algorithms are truly
causing mental health challenges,
education challenges, disinformation
that we end up having to deal with the
problems of. I think they should have to
help pay for that. And so that's all.
It's $200 million. That's not much in a
$56 billion budget.
I think they should pay into our
education system to help us deal with
the problems they're causing, yeah. And
do you think that it'll pass as well as
that?
>> I mean we have 4 and 1/2 months of a
legislative session in which we're going
to talk about that with legislature. I
proposed it as part of my budget and as
part of my state of the state address. I
think it's been well received. People
understand the damage that's being done
by social media and believe that this is
one way in which we might be able to pay
for the
rectifying the damage that's being done.
You know, Governor Pritzker, along the
same lines, as I was flying in here, I
read about another huge layoff in
corporate America
to do with AI and we're seeing that, you
know, specifically among white collar
workers as the first wave.
How worried are you about the effect of
AI and the labor market in particular
and are politicians doing enough to sort
of prepare the American people for what
seems to be happening? Very worried and
no to answer both of your questions.
Look,
AI is going to happen.
There's no stopping it. We're not going
to become Luddites and decide we're not
doing AI in the United States while
everybody else around the world is doing
it. It's going to happen. The question
is first are there ethical guidelines
and guideposts that you know, I think a
company like Anthropic is demonstrating
that you can have those and still have
very successful AI
for everybody to use. That's one part of
it.
>> of course of their recent decision not
to do business with the Department of
Defense.
>> Or at least to leave the guidelines in
place. You know, it's not that they
don't want to do business and they in
fact were doing business. It's just all
of a sudden once again the Trump
administration comes up with something
new to throw out there to to cause
problems. But AI is going to impact
employment. There's no doubt. It's
already happening.
And what we need to be doing as
Democrats, frankly as public officials
on both sides
is addressing what is our answer to
if you go to college and you graduate
with a marketing degree
and now the marketing jobs are not there
or an accounting degree or become a
lawyer and now you can't become an
associate at a law firm because they
don't need as many.
What is our answer to that short and
long term?
And I do not believe that we have
addressed that much at all as a country
and I think Donald Trump is letting it
all run rampant without any solutions to
any of that because he thinks he'll be
out of office before it has real effect
on people. So I'm not sugge- I'm not
going to put out here my you know, what
I think the policies ought to be for the
next few years and beyond on AI except
to say to you that if we are not putting
forward a serious agenda as Democrats
for job creation in jobs that will not
be destroyed by AI and let's just give
examples of the trades. Those are
examples of every you know, AI can't
solve your plumbing, your construction
problems, you know, AI
>> And thank God interviewing. Yeah.
[laughter]
That's Although You don't know how to do
that. or answering those interviews.
So I do think though that if we're not
addressing those and Republicans have no
answers. At least Democrats are
beginning to talk about, you know, what
some of the solutions It's hard. It's
hard to tell an office worker to become
a plumber. I agree and I'm not but we
are talking about truly
>> used to tell coal miners that they had
to code and now we're telling coders
that they have to be coal miners.
>> 100% the paradigm shift is massive. This
is one of the issues of our lifetimes.
What are the degrees that we should be
you know, encouraging young people to go
get? Should we
push people into more into vocational
careers? Should we push people more into
getting a college degree? Some some want
to get a college degree and don't. I've
been expanding vocational training in my
state. I think that that these are the
broad brush questions that are the
questions of our day.
They weren't addressed by Joe Biden.
They weren't addressed in Trump's first
term. They weren't addressed during
Obama's term.
I don't think people could project
forward enough to understand what it's
happening now. So the crisis is is upon
us and coming upon us and so now's the
time to start addressing it.
Governor Pritzker, thank you so much for
talking with me today.
>> Thanks, Lulu. Good to talk to you.
Thanks so much. Okay, now we're doing
some like another segment. Is that the
deal? Not now, but
>> now. So just because
next week over Zoom and it'll it'll be
more on sort of news of the day. I want
to talk about Iran and other [music]
things. I like to to say when people ask
me about foreign policy that my foreign
policy is should we build a wall to keep
the Hoosiers out?
Or not. That's my favorite.
>> Fair.
On the interview, we speak to our guest
twice. [music] I speak with the governor
again about the war in Iran and the
future of the United States'
relationship with Israel.
Nice to see you.
Nice to see you, too. I want to ask you
about the current conflict in the Middle
East because you have positioned
yourself as a leader in the national
Democratic Party.
And as we speak, we're
in the second week of a war with Iran
and I'm just wondering how you think
it's going. My observation is that
President Trump got us into this war
without clear objectives.
And the result of that is that no one
knows really where we're supposed to be
going.
So although President Trump has talked
about trying to avoid forever wars it
seems like if you get into a conflict
and don't know how it's supposed to end,
that turn can turn into easily into a
forever war. And so when you're then
spending billions of dollars to get into
a conflict where we were
you know, not drawn into it for any
reason other than Donald Trump's choice.
You have to wonder
you know, is Donald Trump actually
carrying out the mandate that he thinks
he was elected to carry out. I thought
he said he wasn't going to get us into
more conflicts and yet we have
Venezuela, Iran. He's talking about
invading Cuba.
You know, there's there's a lot going on
here that I think is evidence of Donald
Trump lying
about who he was going to be when he got
elected and it's a distraction from what
really matters to most American families
right now. But as far as the war, I can
tell you that
you know, with 140 [clears throat]
now American troops that have been
reported wounded and
half a dozen or more that have been
killed I you know, I wonder how long
this conflict will go and I think the
American public does not want to see it
go any further
and you know, again, what are we trying
to achieve?
It's unclear. I mean, as you say, it is
an unpopular conflict.
We're seeing polling that shows that you
know, the majority of Americans are
against the conflict.
And it's having this polarizing effect
also on the left and the right
specifically around Israel's involvement
because obviously we're not prosecuting
the war alone.
And
you know, the Democratic Party writ
large
has been moving away from this
unequivocal support of Israel. You know,
recent polling showed overwhelming
sympathy towards Palestinians in the
wake of the Gaza war among Democrats.
And there's definitely a belief on the
left and not only on the left, we should
say, um, that we should give Israel less
support.
And I'm just wondering what you think of
the United States government's
relationship with Israel should be going
forward.
You know, I've been terribly
disappointed with the leadership of that
was elected in Israel. I, you know, I
want to start by saying I respect the
fact that it has been a democracy and
they elect their leaders.
Um, but they've made the same kind of
mistake, to be frank, that the United
States
electorate has made in electing someone
like Benjamin Netanyahu and here in the
United States, Donald Trump. And
the result of Netanyahu's leadership has
been to
uh, create uh, additional wars, drawing
the United States into those wars, and
very importantly,
um, not carrying out what I think are
the fundamental values of people who uh,
live in Israel, and that is the value of
human life and the value of protecting
people who are uh, vulnerable
uh, and innocent. And um,
let me be clear. With [snorts] regard to
Iran, the uh, leadership of Iran, these
were torturous, murderous people.
Um, so I no love lost on my part uh,
when it comes to, you know, the
leadership being decapitated in Iran.
Question whether that was a job that we
should be involved in uh, and whether we
should be replacing leadership across
the world that we disagree with or think
are are terrible uh, leaders
um,
and are murderers. Um,
but I I must admit I
you know, I'm I'm I'm challenged by this
current situation because I you know,
Israel was created as a safe haven for
Jews around the world
uh, who, you know, we were in danger of
extinction
>> [clears throat]
>> um, across the world and uh, and Israel
became that hope for Jews everywhere.
Uh, and it has
carried out, I think over
almost all of the years of its
existence, a desire simply to live in
peace and uh, within its own borders to,
you know, construct a society where
people can live and work and and exist
um,
uh, and hope that that they wouldn't be
attacked. Unfortunately, Israel has been
under attack over a lot of years. Um,
meanwhile, here we are where Israel had
an opportunity um, after
uh, the atrocities that were committed
by Hamas on uh, October 7th of 2023.
I and Israel had conducted operations
uh, in retaliation. Uh, there was an
opportunity, I think, for Israel to uh,
then do what I think it it's
uh, has over its history done, which is
to operate in a humanitarian fashion.
Um, to make sure that that food aid was
delivered to the innocent, uh, to make
sure that when bombs were being dropped
or the war was being uh,
um,
uh, conducted in Gaza that that that
minimized it would minimize uh, innocent
um, deaths [clears throat]
that would occur.
Um, that didn't happen and I think
that's on Netanyahu, that's on the um,
leadership that he put in place.
So, I I believe strongly that we need to
not only secure
uh, and grant the right to exist for the
state of Israel as a safe haven, but
also that we should have a state where
Palestinians can be safe uh, and live in
peace. And and that should be in Gaza,
if you ask me.
Uh, and so I I am
torn because we now have a US government
that's supporting policies that I don't
think the majority of Americans believe
in and I don't think a majority even of
Israelis believe in. Um, but that's
what's being carried out now.
It's interesting I hear you use the word
torn and challenged.
And [snorts]
I know that this must be, as it is for
many Jews, an incredibly difficult
conversation to have. You know, you used
to also be on the board of AIPAC, um,
the pro-Israel lobby group, and you've
since sort of distanced yourself from
them. And last August you also endorsed
a Senate effort to block US arms sales
to Israel. You said it sends the right
kind of message.
And it made me wonder if you're
undergoing a sort of personal evolution
on this issue.
Well, I abandoned AIPAC more than a
dozen years ago.
Uh, it was an organization that had at
one time been a bipartisan in nature and
really all about preserving a strong
relationship between the United States
and Israel. Uh, but about that time, a
dozen years ago, it the organization
began to lean much more to the right and
much more pro-Trump, who had then become
a candidate for president. And uh, that
disturbed me greatly because once again,
AIPAC back then was not a PAC, I might
add. It was a public affairs council
as called AIPAC, but it didn't have a
political action committee that was
giving money to candidates. It was up to
the members themselves. I'm a Democrat.
I was supporting Democrats
uh, when they would run for office,
uh, not on behalf of AIPAC, but just
supporting Democrats and I'm somebody
who believed in that strong relationship
and still do.
Um, but but the organization became
political. They created a super PAC.
They began to get involved in elections
directly and choosing to support
candidates that were MAGA and right-wing
and Trumpy. Uh, and honestly, I just I I
didn't want anything to do with that.
Just sort of again, I'm wondering if if
you see that as a sort of personal
evolution you or do you feel like those
organizations changed, the leadership of
Israel changed, AIPAC changed and you
felt distanced from it or your own views
have changed?
Um, I I don't think that
my views haven't changed. What I mean
is, I mean I can't I I can't it's hard
for me to answer that question. I I
think that it's certainly true that
AIPAC changed. That is certainly true.
Um, and and that's why I walked away.
Um, again, do I believe that Israel has
a right to exist? I do. And my
grandfather's name is on a square in
Jerusalem because um, my family has
always believed that there should be a
safe haven for Jews, especially after
World War II. And and I still believe
that that's true. I mean, we look at the
anti-Semitism in the world today. Um,
so uh, so believe in the right of the
state of Israel to exist and as a
democracy.
Um, but I also believe that others have
a right to that kind of safe haven. Uh,
and so
I don't know if my views changed. No, I
think I've always believed that and I
grew up in a home where social justice
was really important and uh, so I I'm
not sure that any of my views exactly
have changed, but certainly true that
the United States government moved away
from the position that I held and that
the uh, government of Israel
uh, under Netanyahu has moved away from
my position and AIPAC, of course, has
just become something uh, completely
unacceptable.
So, where do you think that leaves
someone like you? Like if you were in a
position to decide US-Israel policy,
which I absolutely understand that
you're not. Um, what exactly should
America's relationship be, in your view,
to the state of Israel right now? We
should be a peacemaker. That's what we
should do. And it's certainly true that
that instead of simply going along with
Benjamin Netanyahu's plan that he's had
for very many years, by the way,
uh, to to attack Iran, um, we should
have asked the question, are there
alternatives? But
you know,
the
the fact that uh, Benjamin Netanyahu
made the appeal to Donald Trump, and I
don't know exactly what was said.
There's a lot that's been written
uh, in kind of guesstimating what was
said. Uh, but I I I
you know, the fact that Donald Trump
went along, that's the example of the
thing that we shouldn't be doing. What
we should have been doing is
discouraging Netanyahu, explaining to
him that he can't use US weapons for
something like what he was trying to
carry out. Uh, that is if we wanted to
maintain peace in the Middle East. Now,
once again, there've been other methods
that have been used to degrade
uh, the Iranian ability to develop a
nuclear weapon, as you know, and they've
been reasonably effective. Uh, Donald
Trump dismantled many of those things
and that has put us in the situation
that we're now in. This issue is one
that has divided a lot of Jewish
families. Um, and so I'm just wondering
on a personal note, if that's been
something that's come up in yours,
especially as you've been deciding what
positions to take publicly as a
governor.
Well, you can imagine, I I think anybody
that's got a family of more than one or
two people, there are a lot of different
views. There I have there are a few
Republicans in my family. There are
I don't think there's anybody that's
pro-Trump, I might add, but but a few
Republicans and
um, and
you know, we have differences of
opinions on lots of issues that come up
even among Democrats.
So, Thank you then. I mean, we argue all
the time about everything, so
>> Yeah, well, there's a joke among Jews
that, you know, if there are two Jews,
there are three opinions
about any issue. And so,
so I think that's probably true in lots
of different religions and families, I
might add. So,
yeah, I look I I think that we have
differences within my family
politically,
but
but one thing I think we do share in
common is that that core belief in
social justice and standing up for those
who are oppressed.
>> [clears throat]
>> You know, those carry through with that
throughout my family.
In this sort of same bucket, in his
memoir, Governor Josh Shapiro of
Pennsylvania said Kamala Harris's vice
presidential vetting team asked him
about his faith
and even if he was an Israeli agent. And
you were also vetted, and I'm just
wondering if they asked you the same
things in the same way.
>> [snorts]
>> They they did not ask me those same
things in the same way.
You know, going through that experience
of being vetted for vice president is
like getting a well, the worst kind of
colonoscopy that you could get.
And so, they ask a lot of questions.
It's it's tough vetting.
And I know, you know, some of it I guess
seemed offensive
and you know, to to to Josh Shapiro. Um
And
I don't know what led them to ask that
question. I wasn't asked and yet I'm
Jewish and I'm
I think I'm I'm
as much a an adherent to my religion as
Josh Shapiro is. So, not exactly sure
who asked that question or why. I'm
What I can say is that I wasn't asked
those things. I was asked hard
questions, for sure,
but nothing quite like that.
So,
what kind of
dancing around this central thing, which
I feel compelled you,
which is that you are
often mentioned as a potential 2028
candidate for president.
And I'm just wondering what you're
weighing as you're making that decision.
You know, I'm not weighing that
decision. I know you find that
surprising, maybe, but I
I'm running for real.
>> it true? I'm running for re-election as
governor. That's what I'm focused on.
And
listen, I'm proud and and pleased that
that people think that my leadership is,
you know, something that that would put
me on the stage as a potential
presidential candidate,
but
you know, but I I look,
for whatever, you know, the reasons that
people are doing that,
I think have more to do with just the
conviction that I have offered on the
subject of stepping, you know, between
Donald Trump and the people of my state
and protecting people and speaking out
and being
unafraid to do so. So, I think I wish
more Democratic politicians were doing
that right now, and I wish more
politicians in general, I wish
Republicans would get religion about,
you know, standing by the law and the
Constitution. But
but so I guess that's why people have
considered me as a potential candidate,
but I really am focused on the things
that matter to the people of my state
and I will continue to do so. And and if
the question comes up in the future,
first question to me will be that I'll
have to answer for myself
is
whatever choices I make, is this the
best thing for the state of Illinois and
the people of Illinois? Governor,
looking at the world right now and
America's place in it, it reminds me of
what many Democrats see as President
Biden's fundamental sort of
miscalculation, if you will. When he
became president, he pitched that Trump
was an aberration, that we can go back
to the before times.
And I think we've now seen that there's
sort of no going back to what came
before.
As Canada's Mark Carney said in Davos,
the old order is not coming back.
And looking at the future beyond Trump,
what
do you think is coming? What keeps you
up at night? And also, what gives you
hope? Donald Trump has made this world
less safe.
What keeps me up at night is that when
we say we are that the world order is
changing, that that it means less order.
And it means there is more
>> [clears throat]
>> adventurism that's taking place not just
by the United States, but by other
countries, too. If the world isn't
willing to act, if the free world isn't
willing to act
as a collective against the Russian
aggression on Ukraine,
then
then we allow countries simply to
decide, we don't like our neighbor or
we'd like to have some of their
territory. We're just going to invade.
If we have a more powerful army, it's
ours for the taking.
So, that is the world I'm afraid is is
now upon us
and that we need to stop.
I agree that Donald Trump may have
permanently blown up a world in which
the United States was the leader.
And where now maybe we won't be anymore.
But I do think, and I've talked to a lot
of people who live in Europe, Americans
who live in Europe,
and I've asked them, you know, do you
think we can
re-establish
the trust that we had with our allies in
Europe. Can we, you know, put it back
together so that we're all working in
unison with one another with the United
States at the helm. And their answer, I
asked how long would it take to do that,
and two of them, the three people that I
can think of,
said 20 years.
And the third one said never.
And I believe it is between 20 years and
never. And that So, that is the fear
that I have, okay? Now, what is my
optimism or, you know, what what what do
I hope What am I hoping for?
I'm hoping that
when finally we're able to re-establish
ourselves as a trustworthy ally,
that we can go to the most important of
our international relationships and on a
one-to-one basis restore a sense of
order and direction for those
relationships and that the United States
can be the most important of the allies
among a you know, a a plethora of
equals, let's say.
And then I, you know, our our job,
I think, if we're able to do that, is to
restore hope among the American people.
I think that people have lost the hope
and the optimism and the you know, the
the sense that we belong to the greatest
nation in the world, that we're all
lucky to be here and that we have
obligations. How about if we return to a
world where people sort of feel like
they owe something
and are willing to to give to our
country and to promote our country
throughout the world as a leader of
peace.
Governor Pritzker, thank you so much. I
really have enjoyed our conversation.
Thank you, Lulu.
>> [music]
>> I'm Lulu Garcia Navarro. And I'm David
Marchese. And [music] we're the hosts of
The Interview, an audio and video
podcast from The New York Times.
>> Every week we interview fascinating and
influential people from all walks of
life. Subscribe to our YouTube channel
so you'll never miss an episode.